Whitehead-principle (#1453)
UniMath/agda-unimath: src/synthetic-homotopy-theory/whitehead-principle-types.lagda.md

> # The Whitehead principle for types

Reviewer: I believe this file is about the "main" principle people recognize as Whitehead's principle.

```suggestion
# The Whitehead principle
```

```agda
module synthetic-homotopy-theory.whitehead-principle-types where
```

<details><summary>Imports</summary>

```agda
open import foundation.connected-types
open import foundation.dependent-pair-types
open import foundation.functoriality-truncation
open import foundation.truncation-levels
open import foundation.truncations
open import foundation.universe-levels

open import foundation-core.contractible-types
open import foundation-core.equivalences
open import foundation-core.fibers-of-maps
open import foundation-core.identity-types
open import foundation-core.propositions
```

</details>

## Idea

> A type is said to be **∞-connected** if it is `n`-connected for all `n : 𝕋`.
> 
> Contractible types are ∞-connected.
> 
> The **Whitehead principle for types** asserts the converse, that ∞-connected
> types are contractible. In
> (whitehead-principle-maps)[synthetic-homotopy-theory.whitehead-principle-maps.md],
> we show (assuming enough universes) that this is equivalent to maps whose fibers
> are ∞-connected being equivalences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {{#concept "Whitehead principle" Agda=Whitehead-Principle}} asserts  that [∞-connected types](foundation.infinity-connected-types.md) are [contractible](foundation-core.contractible-types.md). I.e., if a type is $n$-[connected](foundation.connected-types.md) for every $n$, then it is contractible. This principle is also referred to as _hypercompleteness_ and is not validated in every ∞-topos.

In
(`whitehead-principle-maps`)[synthetic-homotopy-theory.whitehead-principle-maps.md]
we show, assuming enough universes, that the Whitehead principle is equivalent to asking that maps whose fibers
are ∞-connected are equivalences.
```

Author: I adjusted this slightly but it should be good.

## Definition

### ∞-connected types

```agda
is-∞-connected-Prop : {l : Level} (X : UU l) → Prop l
is-∞-connected-Prop X = Π-Prop 𝕋 (λ k → is-connected-Prop k X)

is-∞-connected : {l : Level} (X : UU l) → UU l
is-∞-connected X = type-Prop (is-∞-connected-Prop X)

is-prop-is-∞-connected : {l : Level} (X : UU l) → is-prop (is-∞-connected X)
is-prop-is-∞-connected X = is-prop-type-Prop (is-∞-connected-Prop X)
```

### Contractible types are ∞-connected

```agda
is-contr-is-∞-connected : {l : Level} (X : UU l) → is-contr X → is-∞-connected X
is-contr-is-∞-connected X X-ctr k = is-connected-is-contr k X-ctr

> ```

Reviewer: This should be in a different module `foundation.infinity-connected-types`

### The Whitehead principle for types

```agda
Whitehead-Principle-Level : (l : Level) → UU (lsuc l)
Whitehead-Principle-Level l = (X : UU l) → is-∞-connected X → is-contr X

Whitehead-Principle : UUω
Whitehead-Principle = {l : Level} → Whitehead-Principle-Level l
```

## Properties

### Being ∞-connected is invariant under equivalence

```agda
module _
  {l1 l2 : Level} {A : UU l1} {B : UU l2}
  where

  is-∞-connected-is-equiv :
    (f : A → B) → is-equiv f → is-∞-connected B → is-∞-connected A
  is-∞-connected-is-equiv f e B-∞-conn k =
    is-contr-is-equiv (type-trunc k B) (map-trunc k f)
    ( is-equiv-map-equiv-trunc k (f , e)) (B-∞-conn k)

  is-∞-connected-equiv :
    A ≃ B → is-∞-connected B → is-∞-connected A
  is-∞-connected-equiv f B-∞-conn k =
    is-∞-connected-is-equiv (pr1 f) (pr2 f) B-∞-conn k

module _
  {l1 l2 : Level} {A : UU l1} {B : UU l2}
  where

  is-∞-connected-equiv' : A ≃ B → is-∞-connected A → is-∞-connected B
  is-∞-connected-equiv' f = is-∞-connected-equiv (inv-equiv f)

  is-∞-connected-is-equiv' :
    (f : A → B) → is-equiv f → is-∞-connected A → is-∞-connected B
  is-∞-connected-is-equiv' f e = is-∞-connected-equiv' (f , e)

> ```

Reviewer: This should be in `foundation.infinity-connected-types`

Author: Done.

> ```

Reviewer: Please add the following and its converse

````suggestion
```

## See also

- [The plus principle](synthetic-homotopy-theory.plus-principle.md)
````

> ```

Reviewer: Also consider adding an "External links" section with links to nlab and wikipedias pages on hypercompleteness or whitehead's principle, if they exist

# The Whitehead principle for types

```agda
module synthetic-homotopy-theory.whitehead-principle-types where
```

<details><summary>Imports</summary>

```agda
open import foundation.connected-types
open import foundation.dependent-pair-types
open import foundation.functoriality-truncation
open import foundation.infinity-connected-types
open import foundation.truncation-levels
open import foundation.truncations
open import foundation.universe-levels

open import foundation-core.contractible-types
open import foundation-core.equivalences
open import foundation-core.fibers-of-maps
open import foundation-core.identity-types
open import foundation-core.propositions
```

</details>

## Idea

The {{#concept "Whitehead principle" Agda=Whitehead-Principle}} asserts that
[∞-connected types](foundation.infinity-connected-types.md) are
[contractible](foundation-core.contractible-types.md). I.e., if a type is
$n$-[connected](foundation.connected-types.md) for every $n$, then it is
contractible. This principle is also referred to as _hypercompleteness_ and is
not validated in every ∞-topos.

In
(`whitehead-principle-maps`)[synthetic-homotopy-theory.whitehead-principle-maps.md]

> we show, assuming Whitehead principles in enough universes, that the Whitehead
> principle for types is equivalent to asking that maps whose fibers are
> ∞-connected are equivalences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we show, assuming the Whitehead principle in enough universes, that the
Whitehead principle for types is
[equivalent](foundation-core.logical-equivalences.md) to asking that maps whose
[fibers](foundation-core.fibers-of-maps.md) are ∞-connected are
[equivalences](foundation-core.equivalences.md).
```
